---
title: 'Pentel Orenz AT 0.5mm 2023 First Impressions'
author: 'Jack Dorland'
date: 'April 19th, 2023'
---

So, I just recently got in a new Pentel Orenz AT from JetPens. The pencil has already, as of three <!--more--> days of owning it, completely blown me away in its quality and its capability.  The pencil is, of course, in the Orenz product line, which means it has a very nice (and more reliable than before) automatic lead advancement system. My main gripe with the Orenz Nero, which is the previous pencil, was that the lead advancement system (referred to as 'auto-lead' for the rest of this post) is extremely unrelaible and not useful at all. It was *so* bad on the Orenz and Orenz Nero that they had to include an 'unjamming' pin which is stuck into the back of the eraser. I found myself so often using this 'unjamming' pin in order to remove lead buildup in the barrel that it became genuinely insufferable to use the Orenz for an extended period of time in writing. The Orenz AT, on the other hand, solves all of these problems.

The auto-lead system is really quite marvelous for the smoothness it now exhibits in daily usage. I've used the Orenz AT almost every day for a myriad of reasons, mostly to take exams. The Orenz AT strikes me as a useful alternative to the original Orenz and Orenz Nero, which were somewhat of a mere test-drive of the capabilities that the Orenz platform has. While both pencils sold well, and I mean *very* well, this pencil is an evolution-no, *revolution* in terms of the Orenz's quality and capability. This pencil, while previously jamming in (what felt like) every few minutes, has not jammed a single time for me over my short time of using it. While it may worsen with age, which is something I'll discuss in my six-month review, so far this pencil has had zero issues.

The body is constructed out of what feels like a light metal, but JetPens writes on the "Specifications" page that it's actually plastic. This is a little disappointing, as the older Metal Grip Orenz pencils were far better constructed despite the jamming issues. I miss the knurled grip quite a bit, which would add a lot to this pencil's feel-for example, the Holy Grail of metal pencils would be a Rotring 500/600/800 series pencil. These pencils are best-in-class in terms of the metal construction and quality-knurled grip, all brass barrel, sturdy clip, and strong internal construction, too. This is what I *wish* the Orenz AT was like: it tried to be a Rotring competitior with its' sleek, metal-like look and fairly expensive price tag ($26 USD), but it just falls short in terms of build materials. I would be happy to pay more for a pencil with an auto-lead system that also used similar quality materials to a Rotring pencil, but $26 is a little crazy for a pencil of this construction.

Additionally, this pencil has lost what makes pencils in the Orenz line special: the 0.2mm option. Pentel's use of 0.2mm lead in Orenz pencils was once their defining factor; auto-lead systems are becoming more common in other pencils, and so are guide-pipe systems to protect lead. Pencils are so advanced nowadays that you really have to think about what you want, need, and don't like in a pencil. Personally, I'm a large fan of Kuru Toga pencils for their use in writing, of which I do a lot of. But for others, pencils like the Orenz AT might be more practical, and the reason these pencils used to be the gold standard in pencils used primarily for Math is that the 0.2mm size was perfect for cramming equations and solutions into tiny areas.

Even though I really did just rip into it for two paragraphs, I'll be honest and say that I'm really enjoying using it so far. I thought 0.5mm was going to be too large for a pencil like the Orenz, as I'm accustomed to using Metal Grip 0.2mm Orenz pencils, but this pencil is still fantastic either way. It's a higher end, strong contender for a modern pencil for (mainly) math students.

If you're looking for something heavier and without all of this fancy jam-prone technology, head for Rotring immediately. The Rotring 600 (or 800 with a tape mod) is an excellent, executive pencil which does everything the Orenz AT tries to do, minus the auto-lead system. Alternatively, for a pencil that does well for writing, I'll always point you towards something like the Uni a-gel Switch or Uni Kuru Toga.  
